feat(docs): cheatcode docs (#1585)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs/dev_docs/testing/cheat_codes.md

---
title: Cheat Codes
---

## Introduction

Most of the time, simply testing your smart contract isn't enough. To manipulate the state of the Aztec blockchain, as well as test for specific reverts and events, the sandbox is shipped with a set of cheatcodes.

> Cheatcodes allow you to change the time of the L2 block, load certain state or more easily manipulate L1 instead of having to write dedicated RPC calls to anvil. 

Reviewer: This has just made me think, should we make the cheat codes agnostic of hardhat / anvil

Author: hmm aztec uses anvil within the sandbox though

:::info Prerequisites
If you aren't familiar with [Anvil](https://book.getfoundry.sh/anvil/), we recommend reading up on that since Aztec Sandbox uses Anvil as the local L1 instance.
:::

### Aims

The guide will cover how to manipulate the state of the:
- L1 blockchain
- Aztec network.
### Why is this useful?

> <!-- Contextualise why a dapp developer needs this. What use cases / products / features does this unlock? Any real world examples? -->

Reviewer 2: You should probably create an issue for this such that it is not forgotten or finish it as part of this pr.

### Dependencies

For this guide, the following Aztec packages are used:
- @aztec/aztec.js

### Initialisation
```js
import { createAztecRpcClient, CheatCodes } from '@aztec/aztec.js';

> const aztecRpcUrl = 'http://localhost:8080';

Reviewer: The create signature is 
create(ethRpcUrl, aztecRpcUrl)

Author: Doesn't look like it?
For creating the aztec rpc client, the sandbox uses `createAztecRpcClient(aztecRpcUrl);` [here](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/4af4845f80b1be548efa1ca79f5588bb1c7f1423/yarn-project/aztec-sandbox/src/examples/uniswap_trade_on_l1_from_l2.ts#L58)

And for cheatcodes it is `create(rpcUrl: string, aztecRpc: AztecRPC)`

Reviewer: My mistake, youre absolutely correct

const aztecRpcClient = createAztecRpcClient(aztecRpcUrl);

> const cc = CheatCodes.create(aztecRpcUrl, aztecRpcClient);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const cc = await CheatCodes.create(aztecRpcUrl, aztecRpcClient);
```

```

> There are two properties of the CheatCodes class - `l1` and `l2` for cheatcodes relating to the L1 and L2 (Aztec) respectively.

Reviewer: This has made me think that the interface should change to `.eth` and `.aztec` rather than `l1` and `l1`. 
This would make it a good bit more explicit

Author: I actually really like this - will modify!

Reviewer 2: I think is better. Have approved the change in the #1611.

## L1 related cheatcodes

> These are cheatcodes exposed from anvil. But instead of having to know the right RPC calls to make and format the curl request appropirately, there are convenient wrappers exposed to developers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These are cheatcodes exposed from anvil conveniently wrapped for ease of use in the Sandbox.
```

### Interface
```
// Fetch current block number of L1
public async blockNumber(): Promise<number> 

// Fetch chain ID of L1
public async chainId(): Promise<number> 

// Fetch current timestamp on L1
public async timestamp(): Promise<number> 

// Mine a given number of blocks on L1. Mines 1 block by default
public async mine(numberOfBlocks = 1): Promise<void> 

// Set the timestamp for the next block on L1. 
public async setNextBlockTimestamp(timestamp: number): Promise<void> 

> // Dumps the current L1 chain state to a given file. Can be used with `loadChainState()` to first create a forked version of mainnet on anvil (to for example interact with uniswap), save the chain state to a file, and later load it to the sandbox' anvil instance.

Reviewer 2: Should probably be multiple lines, if seen in most browsers will move out of the field of view.

public async startPrank(who: EthAddress): Promise<void> 

// Stop impersonating an account on L1 that you are currently impersonating.
public async stopPrank(who: EthAddress): Promise<void> 

// Set the bytecode for a L1 contract
public async etch(contract: EthAddress, bytecode: `0x${string}`): Promise<void> 

// Get the bytecode for a L1 contract
public async getBytecode(contract: EthAddress): Promise<`0x${string}`> 
```

### blockNumber

#### Function Signature 
```js
public async blockNumber(): Promise<number>
```

#### Description
Fetches the current L1 block number

#### Example
```js
const blockNumber = await cc.l1.blockNumber()
```

### chainId

#### Function Signature 
```js
public async chainId(): Promise<number>  
```

#### Description
Fetches the L1 chain ID

#### Example 
```js
const chainId = await cc.l1.chainId()
```

### timestamp

#### Function Signature
```js
public async timestamp(): Promise<number> 
```

#### Description 
Fetches the current L1 timestamp

#### Example
```js 
const timestamp = await cc.l1.timestamp()
```

### mine

#### Function Signature
```js
public async mine(numberOfBlocks = 1): Promise<void> 
```

#### Description

> Mines the specified number of blocks on L1 (default 1)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mines the specified number of blocks on L1 (default 1).
```

#### Example
```js
const blockNum = await cc.l1.blockNumber();
await cc.l1.mine(10) // mines 10 blocks
const newBlockNum = await cc.l1.blockNumber(); // = blockNum + 10.
```

### setNextBlockTimestamp

#### Function Signature  
```js
public async setNextBlockTimestamp(timestamp: number): Promise<void>
```

#### Description
Sets the timestamp (unix format in seconds) for the next mined block on L1  

> Remember that timestamp can only be set in the future and not in the past.

Reviewer 2: Will the cheatcode throw an error if called in the past, or will things simply break? If they are just breaking, better to throw explicitly.

Author: throws an explicit error

#### Example
```js

> await cc.l1.setNextBlockTimestamp(1692183270) // Set next block timestamp to 16 Aug 2023 10:54:30 GMT

Reviewer 2: The comment here will most often go out of the field of view. Probably better to have on the line above etc.

// next transaction you will do will have the timestamp as 1692183270
```

### dumpChainState

#### Function Signature
```js
public async dumpChainState(fileName: string): Promise<void> 
```

#### Description
Dumps the current L1 chain state to a file
Returns a hex string representing the complete state of the chain. Can be re-imported into a fresh/restarted instance of Anvil to reattain the same state.

#### Example
```js
await cc.l1.dumpChainState('chain-state.json') 
```

### loadChainState

#### Function Signature 
```js
public async loadChainState(fileName: string): Promise<void>
```

#### Description
Loads the L1 chain state from a file. 
When given a hex string previously returned by `cc.l1.dumpChainState()`, merges the contents into the current chain state. Will overwrite any colliding accounts/storage slots.

#### Example  
```js
await cc.l1.loadChainState('chain-state.json')
```

### load  

#### Function Signature
```js
public async load(contract: EthAddress, slot: bigint): Promise<bigint>
```

#### Description  

> Loads the value at a storage slot of a L1 contract

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Loads the value at a storage slot of a L1 contract.
```

#### Example
```
/// contract LeetContract {
///     uint256 private leet = 1337; // slot 0
/// }

const value = await cc.l1.load(EthAddress.from(leetContractAddress), BigInt(0));
console.log(value); // 1337
```

### store

#### Function Signature
```js
public async store(contract: EthAddress, slot: bigint, value: bigint): Promise<void>  
```

#### Description

> Stores the value in storage slot on a L1 contract

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Stores the value in storage slot on a L1 contract.
```

#### Example
```
/// contract LeetContract {
///     uint256 private leet = 1337; // slot 0
/// }

await cc.l1.store(EthAddress.from(leetContractAddress), BigInt(0), BigInt(1000));
const value = await cc.l1.load(EthAddress.from(leetContractAddress), BigInt(0));
console.log(value); // 1000
```

### keccak256

#### Function Signature  
```js
public keccak256(baseSlot: bigint, key: bigint): bigint
```

#### Description 

> Computes the storage slot for a map key

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Computes the storage slot for a map key.
```

// store balance of 0xdead as 100
await cc.l1.store(contractAddress, slot, 100n);
```

### startPrank

#### Function Signature
```js 
public async startPrank(who: EthAddress): Promise<void>
```

#### Description  
Start impersonating an L1 account
Sets msg.sender for all subsequent calls until stopPrank is called.

#### Example
```js
await cc.l1.startPrank(EthAddress.fromString(address));
```

### stopPrank

#### Function Signature
```js
public async stopPrank(who: EthAddress): Promise<void>
```

#### Description
Stop impersonating an L1 account  
Stops an active prank started by startPrank, resetting msg.sender to the values before startPrank was called.

#### Example
```js  
await cc.l1.stopPrank(EthAddress.fromString(address)) 
```

### getBytecode

#### Function Signature
```js
public async getBytecode(contract: EthAddress): Promise<`0x${string}`>
```

#### Description  
Get the bytecode for an L1 contract

#### Example
```js
const bytecode = await cc.l1.getBytecode(contract) // 0x6080604052348015610010...
```

### etch

#### Function Signature 
```js
public async etch(contract: EthAddress, bytecode: `0x${string}`): Promise<void> 
```

#### Description

> Set the bytecode for an L1 contract

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set the bytecode for an L1 contract.
```

```js
const bytecode = `0x6080604052348015610010...`
await cc.l1.etch(contract, bytecode)
console.log(await cc.l1.getBytecode(contract)) // 0x6080604052348015610010...
```

## L2 related cheatcodes
These are cheatcodes specific to manipulating the state of Aztec rollup.

### Interface
```
// Get the current L2 block number
public async blockNumber(): Promise<number>

// Set time of the next execution on L2. It also modifies time on L1 for next execution and stores this time as the last rollup block on the rollup contract.
public async warp(to: number): Promise<void>

// Loads the value stored at the given slot in the public storage of the given contract.
public async loadPublic(who: AztecAddress, slot: Fr | bigint): Promise<Fr>

// Computes the slot value for a given map and key.
public computeSlotInMap(baseSlot: Fr | bigint, key: Fr | bigint): Fr
```

### blockNumber

#### Function Signature
```js
public async blockNumber(): Promise<number>
```

#### Description  
Get the current L2 block number

#### Example
```js
const blockNumber = await cc.l2.blockNumber()
```

### warp 

#### Function Signature
```js
public async warp(to: number): Promise<void>
```

#### Description

> Set time of the next execution on L2 and L1 for next execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sets the time of L1 and the time of the next L2 block.
```

> Like with the corresponding L1 cheatcode, time can only be set in the future, not the past.

Reviewer 2: Will the cheatcode throw an error if called in the past, or will things simply break? If they are just breaking, better to throw explicitly.

#### Example
```js
const timestamp = await cc.l1.timestamp();
const newTimestamp = timestamp + 100_000_000;
await cc.l2.warp(newTimestamp);

> // any noir contract calls that make use of current timestamp now will have `newTimestamp`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// any noir contract calls that make use of current timestamp and is executed in the next rollup block will now read `newTimestamp`
```

```

> ### loadPublic

Reviewer 2: We should probably add a comment here related to structs as they are not in a single slot, e.g., if your example were using a struct the `loadPublic` would only load part of it.

---
title: Cheat Codes
---

## Introduction

To help with testing, the sandbox is shipped with a set of cheatcodes.

Cheatcodes allow you to change the time of the Aztec block, load certain state or more easily manipulate Ethereum instead of having to write dedicated RPC calls to anvil or hardhat. 

:::info Prerequisites
If you aren't familiar with [Anvil](https://book.getfoundry.sh/anvil/), we recommend reading up on that since Aztec Sandbox uses Anvil as the local Ethereum instance.
:::

### Aims

The guide will cover how to manipulate the state of the:
- Ethereum blockchain;
- Aztec network.

### Dependencies

For this guide, the following Aztec packages are used:
- @aztec/aztec.js

### Initialisation

> ```js

Reviewer: should get better highlighting using `ts rather than js

import { createAztecRpcClient, CheatCodes } from '@aztec/aztec.js';
const aztecRpcUrl = 'http://localhost:8080';
const aztecRpcClient = createAztecRpcClient(aztecRpcUrl);
const cc = await CheatCodes.create(aztecRpcUrl, aztecRpcClient);
```

There are two properties of the CheatCodes class - `eth` and `aztec` for cheatcodes relating to the Ethereum blockchain (L1) and the Aztec network (L2) respectively.

## Ethereum related cheatcodes
These are cheatcodes exposed from anvil/hardhat conveniently wrapped for ease of use in the Sandbox.

### Interface

> ```

Reviewer: annotate `ts

```js
public async blockNumber(): Promise<number>
```

#### Description
Fetches the current Ethereum block number.

#### Example
```js
const blockNumber = await cc.eth.blockNumber()
```

### chainId

#### Function Signature 
```js
public async chainId(): Promise<number>  
```

#### Description
Fetches the Ethereum chain ID

#### Example 
```js
const chainId = await cc.eth.chainId()
```

### timestamp

#### Function Signature
```js
public async timestamp(): Promise<number> 
```

#### Description 
Fetches the current Ethereum timestamp.

#### Example
```js 
const timestamp = await cc.eth.timestamp()
```

### mine

#### Function Signature
```js
public async mine(numberOfBlocks = 1): Promise<void> 
```

#### Description
Mines the specified number of blocks on Ethereum (default 1).

#### Example
```js
const blockNum = await cc.eth.blockNumber();
await cc.eth.mine(10) // mines 10 blocks
const newBlockNum = await cc.eth.blockNumber(); // = blockNum + 10.
```

### setNextBlockTimestamp

#### Function Signature  
```js
public async setNextBlockTimestamp(timestamp: number): Promise<void>
```

#### Description
Sets the timestamp (unix format in seconds) for the next mined block on Ethereum.

> Remember that timestamp can only be set in the future and not in the past.

Reviewer: nit  its probably worth being explicit about the erroring

Reviewer 2: Probably related to: https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/pull/1585#discussion_r1297072567

```

### loadChainState

#### Function Signature 
```js
public async loadChainState(fileName: string): Promise<void>
```

#### Description
Loads the Ethereum chain state from a file which contains a hex string representing an Ethereum state. 
When given a file previously written to by `cc.eth.dumpChainState()`, it merges the contents into the current chain state. Will overwrite any colliding accounts/storage slots.

#### Example  
```js
await cc.eth.loadChainState('chain-state.json')
```

### load  

#### Function Signature
```js
public async load(contract: EthAddress, slot: bigint): Promise<bigint>
```

#### Description  
Loads the value at a storage slot of a Ethereum contract.

#### Example
```
/// contract LeetContract {
///     uint256 private leet = 1337; // slot 0
/// }

const leetContractAddress = EthAddress.fromString('0x1234...');
const value = await cc.eth.load(leetContractAddress, BigInt(0));
console.log(value); // 1337
```

### store

#### Function Signature
```js
public async store(contract: EthAddress, slot: bigint, value: bigint): Promise<void>  
```

#### Description
Stores the value in storage slot on a Ethereum contract.

#### Example

> ```

Reviewer: probably worth annotating the solidity contracts with `sol and using separate code blocks

/// contract LeetContract {
///     uint256 private leet = 1337; // slot 0
/// }

const leetContractAddress = EthAddress.fromString('0x1234...');
await cc.eth.store(leetContractAddress, BigInt(0), BigInt(1000));
const value = await cc.eth.load(leetContractAddress, BigInt(0));
console.log(value); // 1000

> ```

Reviewer: ```solidity
contract LeetContract {
     uint256 private leet = 1337; // slot 0
 }
```
```ts
const leetContractAddress = EthAddress.fromString('0x1234...');
await cc.eth.store(leetContractAddress, BigInt(0), BigInt(1000));
const value = await cc.eth.load(leetContractAddress, BigInt(0));
console.log(value); // 1000
```

Solidity blocks can be annotated with solidity, they arent perfect in docusaurus but it does offer some highlighting.

```js
await cc.eth.startImpersonating(EthAddress.fromString(address));
```

### stopImpersonating

#### Function Signature
```js
public async stopImpersonating(who: EthAddress): Promise<void>
```

#### Description
Stop impersonating an Ethereum account.
Stops an active impersonation started by startImpersonating.

#### Example
```js  
await cc.eth.stopImpersonating(EthAddress.fromString(address)) 
```

### getBytecode

#### Function Signature
```js
public async getBytecode(contract: EthAddress): Promise<`0x${string}`>
```

#### Description  
Get the bytecode for an Ethereum contract.

#### Example
```js
const bytecode = await cc.eth.getBytecode(contract) // 0x6080604052348015610010...
```

### etch

#### Function Signature 
```js
public async etch(contract: EthAddress, bytecode: `0x${string}`): Promise<void> 
```

#### Description
Set the bytecode for an Ethereum contract.

#### Example  
```js
const bytecode = `0x6080604052348015610010...`
await cc.eth.etch(contract, bytecode)
console.log(await cc.eth.getBytecode(contract)) // 0x6080604052348015610010...
```

## Aztec related cheatcodes
These are cheatcodes specific to manipulating the state of Aztec rollup.

### Interface

> ```

Reviewer: annotate ts

// Computes the slot value for a given map and key.
public computeSlotInMap(baseSlot: Fr | bigint, key: Fr | bigint): Fr
```

### blockNumber

#### Function Signature
```js
public async blockNumber(): Promise<number>
```

#### Description  
Get the current aztec block number.

#### Example
```js
const blockNumber = await cc.aztec.blockNumber()
```

### warp 

#### Function Signature
```js
public async warp(to: number): Promise<void>
```

#### Description
Sets the time on Ethereum and the time of the next block on Aztec.
Like with the corresponding Ethereum cheatcode, time can only be set in the future, not the past.

#### Example
```js
const timestamp = await cc.eth.timestamp();
const newTimestamp = timestamp + 100_000_000;
await cc.aztec.warp(newTimestamp);

// any noir contract calls that make use of current timestamp and is executed in the next rollup block will now read `newTimestamp`
```

### computeSlotInMap

#### Function Signature
```js
public computeSlotInMap(baseSlot: Fr | bigint, key: Fr | bigint): Fr
```

#### Description
Compute storage slot for a map key.
The baseSlot is specified in the noir contract. 

#### Example  
```

> /// struct Storage {

Reviewer: noir snippets can be annotated rust for better results

```

#### Description
Mines the specified number of blocks on Ethereum (default 1).

#### Example
```ts
const blockNum = await cc.eth.blockNumber();
await cc.eth.mine(10) // mines 10 blocks
const newBlockNum = await cc.eth.blockNumber(); // = blockNum + 10.
```

### setNextBlockTimestamp

#### Function Signature  
```ts
public async setNextBlockTimestamp(timestamp: number): Promise<void>
```

#### Description
Sets the timestamp (unix format in seconds) for the next mined block on Ethereum. 
Time can only be set in the future.
If you set the timestamp to a time in the past, this method will throw an error.

#### Example
```ts
// // Set next block timestamp to 16 Aug 2023 10:54:30 GMT
await cc.eth.setNextBlockTimestamp(1692183270) 
// next transaction you will do will have the timestamp as 1692183270
```

### dumpChainState

#### Function Signature
```ts
public async dumpChainState(fileName: string): Promise<void> 
```

#### Description
Dumps the current Ethereum chain state to a file.
Stores a hex string representing the complete state of the chain in a file with the provided path. Can be re-imported into a fresh/restarted instance of Anvil to reattain the same state.

> When combined with `loadChainState()` cheatcode, it can be let you easily import the current state of mainnet into the Anvil instance of the sandbox.

Reviewer 2: The wording is a little weird here, `it can be let you` and it might not be the `current` state. Maybe fine to point to the other cheatcode and say use in combination.

```suggestion
To be used in combination with `loadChainState()`
```

```

#### Description
Mines the specified number of blocks on Ethereum (default 1).

#### Example
```ts
const blockNum = await cc.eth.blockNumber();
await cc.eth.mine(10) // mines 10 blocks
const newBlockNum = await cc.eth.blockNumber(); // = blockNum + 10.
```

### setNextBlockTimestamp

#### Function Signature  
```ts
public async setNextBlockTimestamp(timestamp: number): Promise<void>
```

#### Description
Sets the timestamp (unix format in seconds) for the next mined block on Ethereum. 
Time can only be set in the future.
If you set the timestamp to a time in the past, this method will throw an error.

#### Example
```ts
// // Set next block timestamp to 16 Aug 2023 10:54:30 GMT
await cc.eth.setNextBlockTimestamp(1692183270) 
// next transaction you will do will have the timestamp as 1692183270
```

### dumpChainState

#### Function Signature
```ts
public async dumpChainState(fileName: string): Promise<void> 
```

#### Description
Dumps the current Ethereum chain state to a file.
Stores a hex string representing the complete state of the chain in a file with the provided path. Can be re-imported into a fresh/restarted instance of Anvil to reattain the same state.

> When combined with `loadChainState()` cheatcode, it can be let you easily import the current state of mainnet into the Anvil instance of the sandbox, to use Uniswap for example.

Reviewer: The uniswap example here is really specific to our testing case and probably confusing without context. Lets drop it, people looking for this feature likely have in mind a specific use case

public computeSlotInMap(baseSlot: Fr | bigint, key: Fr | bigint): Fr
```

### blockNumber

#### Function Signature
```ts
public async blockNumber(): Promise<number>
```

#### Description  
Get the current aztec block number.

#### Example
```ts
const blockNumber = await cc.aztec.blockNumber()
```

### warp 

#### Function Signature
```ts
public async warp(to: number): Promise<void>
```

#### Description
Sets the time on Ethereum and the time of the next block on Aztec.
Like with the corresponding Ethereum cheatcode, time can only be set in the future, not the past.
Otherwise, it will throw an error.

#### Example
```ts
const timestamp = await cc.eth.timestamp();
const newTimestamp = timestamp + 100_000_000;
await cc.aztec.warp(newTimestamp);
// any noir contract calls that make use of current timestamp 
// and is executed in the next rollup block will now read `newTimestamp`
```

### computeSlotInMap

#### Function Signature
```ts
public computeSlotInMap(baseSlot: Fr | bigint, key: Fr | bigint): Fr
```

#### Description
Compute storage slot for a map key.
The baseSlot is specified in the noir contract. 

#### Example  
```rust
struct Storage {

>     // highlight-next-line:PublicState

Reviewer: is this still required

    balances: Map<PublicState<Field, FIELD_SERIALISED_LEN>>,
}

impl Storage {
    fn init() -> Self {
        Storage {
            balances: Map::new(1, |slot| PublicState::new(slot, FieldSerialisationMethods)),
        }
    }
}

contract Token {
    ...
}
```

```ts
const slot = cc.aztec.computeSlotInMap(1n, key)
```

### loadPublic

#### Function Signature
```ts
public async loadPublic(who: AztecAddress, slot: Fr | bigint): Promise<Fr> 
```

#### Description
Loads the value stored at the given slot in the public storage of the given contract. 

> Note: One Field element occupies a storage slot. So structs with multiple field elements won't fit in a single slot. So using loadPublic would only load a part of the struct (depending on the size of the attributes within it).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: One Field element occupies a storage slot. Hence, structs with multiple field elements will be spread over multiple slots, rather they will be spread over multiple sequential slots. Using loadPublic will only load a single field of the struct (depending on the size of the attributes within it).
```
Id reword this slightly

#### Example
```rust
struct Storage {
    // highlight-next-line:PublicState
    balances: Map<PublicState<Field, FIELD_SERIALISED_LEN>>,
}

impl Storage {
    fn init() -> Self {
        Storage {
            balances: Map::new(1, |slot| PublicState::new(slot, FieldSerialisationMethods)),
        }
    }
}

contract Token {
    ...
}
```

```ts
const address = AztecAddress.fromString("0x123...")
const slot = cc.aztec.computeSlotInMap(1n, key)
const value = await cc.aztec.loadPublic(address, slot);
```
## Participate

Keep up with the latest discussion and join the conversation in the [Aztec forum](https://discourse.aztec.network).

> You can also use the above link to request for more cheatcodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use the above link to request more cheatcodes.
```
